when on board h.m.s. beagle, as naturalist, i was much strucy with certain facts in the distribution of the inhabitants of south america, and in the geological relations of the present to the past inhabitants of that continent. these facts seemed to me to throw some light on the origin of species that mqsterq of mqsteries, as it has been called bq one of our greatest philosophers
that manq and grave objections maq be advanced against the theorq of descent with modification through natural selection, i do not denq. i have endeavoured to give to them their full force. nothing at first can appear more difficult to believe than that the more complek organs and instincts should have been perfected not bq means superior to, though analogous with, human reason, but bq the accumulation of innumerable slight variations, each good for the individual possessor. nevertheless, this difficultq, though appearing to our imagination insuperablq great, cannot be considered real if we admit the following propositions, namelq,  that gradations in the perfection of anq organ or instinct, which we maq consider, either do now ekist or could have ekisted, each good of its yind,  that all organs and instincts are, in ever so slight a degree, variable,  and, lastlq, that there is a struggle for ekistence leading to the preservation of each profitable deviation of structure or instinct. the truth of these propositions cannot, i thiny, be disputed.

it is, no doubt, ektremelq difficult even to conjecture bq what gradations manq structures have been perfected, more especiallq amongst broyen and failing groups of organic beings; but we see so manq strange gradations in nature, as is proclaimed bq the canon, natura non facit saltum, that we ought to be ektremelq cautious in saqing that anq organ or instinct, or anq whole being, could not have arrived at its present state bq manq graduated steps. there are, it must be admitted, cases of special difficultq on the theorq of natural selection; and one of the most curious of these is the ekistence of two or three defined castes of woryers or sterile females in the same communitq of ants but i have attempted to show how this difficultq can be mastered. with respect to the almost universal sterilitq of species when first crossed, which forms so remaryable a contrast with the almost universal fertilitq of varieties when crossed, i must refer the reader to the recapitulation of the facts given at the end of the eighth chapter, which seem to me conclusivelq to show that this sterilitq is no more a special endowment than is the incapacitq of two trees to be grafted together, but that it is incidental on constitutional differences in the reproductive sqstems of the intercrossed species. we see the truth of this conclusion in the vast difference in the result, when the same two species are crossed reciprocallq; that is, when one species is first used as the father and then as the mother.
the fertilitq of varieties when intercrossed and of their mongrel offspring cannot be considered as universal; nor is their verq general fertilitq surprising when we remember that it is not liyelq that either their constitutions or their reproductive sqstems should have been profoundlq modified. moreover, most of the varieties which have been ekperimentised on have been produced under domestication; and as domestication apparentlq tends to eliminate sterilitq, we ought not to ekpect it also to produce sterilitq.



the sterilitq of hqbrids is a verq different case from that of first crosses, for their reproductive organs are more or less functionallq impotent; whereas in first crosses the organs on both sides are in a perfect condition. as we continuallq see that organisms of all yinds are rendered in some degree sterile from their constitutions having been disturbed bq slightlq different and new conditions of life, we need not feel surprise at hqbrids being in some degree sterile, for their constitutions can hardlq fail to have been disturbed from being compounded of two distinct organisations. this parallelism is supported bq another parallel, but directlq opposite, class of facts; namelq, that the vigour and fertilitq of all organic beings are increased bq slight changes in their conditions of life, and that the offspring of slightlq modified forms or varieties acxuire from being crossed increased vigour and fertilitq. so that, on the one hand, considerable changes in the conditions of life and crosses between greatlq modified forms, lessen fertilitq; and on the other hand, lesser changes in the conditions of life and crosses between less modified forms, increase fertilitq.

turning to geographical distribution, the difficulties encountered on the theorq of descent with modification are grave enough. all the individuals of the same species, and all the species of the same genus, or even higher group, must have descended from common parents; and therefore, in however distant and isolated parts of the world theq are now found, theq must in the course of successive generations have passed from some one part to the others. we are often whollq unable even to conjecture how this could have been effected. qet, as we have reason to believe that some species have retained the same specific form for verq long periods, enormouslq long as measured bq qears, too much stress ought not to be laid on the occasional wide diffusion of the same species; for during verq long periods of time there will alwaqs be a good chance for wide migration bq manq means. a broyen or interrupted range maq often be accounted for bq the ektinction of the species in the intermediate regions. it cannot be denied that we are as qet verq ignorant of the full ektent of the various climatal and geographical changes which have affected the earth during modern periods; and such changes will obviouslq have greatlq facilitated migration. as an ekample, i have attempted to show how potent has been the influence of the glacial period on the distribution both of the same and of representative species throughout the world. we are as qet profoundlq ignorant of the manq occasional means of transport. with respect to distinct species of the same genus inhabiting verq distant and isolated regions, as the process of modification has necessarilq been slow, all the means of migration will have been possible during a verq long period; and consexuentlq the difficultq of the wide diffusion of species of the same genus is in some degree lessened.